Prior to its 2014 conference, the IEEE Sensors Application Symposium (SAS) invited the
Sensibility Testbed team from SSL to run a day-long workshop for participants at their 
conference in Queenstown, New Zealand.
At the time, the fledgling testbed project was new enough that it had only been 
dubbed “Sensibility” 
in August of the previous summer. As such, the workshop was an important showcase 
for the test platform. During the workshop, teams of 3 to 4 participants used
Sensibility to build applications that could
securely access and creatively apply data from smartphone sensors. The initial
Hackathon attracted about 20 people, and a team from the University of Houston
took the top prize for an app that monitored battery levels and informed the
user to turn off Wi-Fi or Bluetooth when power levels fell too low.

The SSL team has gone on to host five more events at SAS conferences, counting
this year’s program on March 13 at the Koreana Hotel in Seoul, Korea. The apps
produced onsite at the workshops have included one that can detect when a device
owner slips and falls (winning entry in 2016 Workshop
in Catania, Italy, developed by a team with members from Qatar and Norway) 
and another that scans nearby WiFi networks to identify the access router with
the best signal quality (winning entry in last year’s event in Glassboro, NJ, built
by Claudio Crema from the University of
Brescia, and Majed Alowaidi from the University of Ottawa.)

While sparking innovation in its participants, the workshops have also 
been a learning experience for the Sensibility team. In a paper titled “Making
Sensibility Testbed Work for SAS,” Yanyan Zhuang (University of Colorado-Colorado Springs),
Richard Weiss(Evergreen College), Albert Rafetseder, and Justin Cappos (NYU Tandon) describe
how the workshops helped them improve the basic design of the testbed. It also
taught them a few lessons about how to run a successful hackathon.

As described in the paper, during the second hackathon, held in Zadar, Croatia, in
2015, a few complications emerged relating to two particular components. The XML-RPC
interface, a remote procedure protocol was initially used to communicate between
the Sensibility app, which was written in Java, and the sandbox, written in a form
of Python. However, in observing Hackathon participants working with the testbed,
it became clear that this interface was slowing down performance, particularly 
Sensibility’s ability to access accelerometers and gyroscope at high frequencies,
as needed for accurately studying the motions of a device. Even worse, as the
authors observe, “the XML-RPC is not a secure communication channel. If an attacker
learns about the designated port, he or she can use an XML-RPC call to get all 
the sensor data as is desired.” 

The other problematic component was a third-party library called Scripting
Language for Android (sl4a), which enabled sensor interfaces in Java. Initially,
once the Sensibility app was installed, it could automatically download this library.
But, after a Google Play store policy change eliminated “in-app” installation, 
the library had to be downloaded manually. This meant an additional step for 
Hackathon participants, taking up time and making the installation process
more complicated.  

By the 2016 Hackathon, in Catania, Italy, the research team had created its own
interface for Sensibility, “by using the Java Native Interface (JNI) to define
Android app interfaces into the Android app on one side, and a custom Python
interpreter that then hosts the Sensibility Testbed sandbox on the other side.”
This change, coupled with a few other design modifications (writing and compiling
custom sensor bindings into the Python interpreter using the CPython API, and 
the creation of wrapper functions for the sandboxed code “so that the extent
of sensor access can be tailored,” ) meant that both sl4a and the XML-RPC 
interface could be eliminated. Now, installing Sensibility was a much simpler
one-step process, and the testbed was both easier to use and more secure. 

However, just because your design is optimized doesn’t mean your event will
run smoothly. The authors note that the 2016 event was hosted in the Museo
Diocesano in Catania, a museum holding artifacts that date back to the 13th 
Century. The intermittent and poor quality WiFi in the building seemed
designed to match the age of its surroundings. Whether compensating
for slow WiFi, or making sure the testbed kept pace with the ever-evolving
Linux kernel on which Android devices are based, the hackathons forced 
the research team to stay a step ahead. Sometimes that meant improving
documentation for those programming in Python for the first time, other times
it meant guiding participants using Windows laptops through the process 
of downloading the Python environment. 

Lastly, the team acknowledges that balancing Sensibility between the
security and privacy needs inherent in running on donated devices, 
and the usability features required to allow rookie programmers to
install and design apps with minimal training, is an ongoing challenge.
Pointing to the cameras and microphones on devices, which Sensibility
automatically disables access to in order to protect the privacy of donors,
the researchers note that participants often request access to these sensors
“for applications like facial recognition and intrusion detection.” The
answer to such requests is always “no.” Though it’s “made some applications
impossible to implement,” the authors conclude, “the resulting security
benefit was greater.”

To read more about the SAS workshops and Sensibility Testbed, access
the article [here](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/personalpages/jcappos/.)
